[rfc] Support symbolic shape inference — add RFC (#7692)
onnx/onnx: docs/proposals/0008-SymbolicDimArithmetic.md

### Broadcast with symbolic expressions

Many operators (e.g., `Add`, `Mul`, `Max`) apply NumPy-style multidirectional broadcasting. The helper that computes broadcast output shapes is `multidirectionalBroadcastShapeInference` (`onnx/defs/shape_inference.h`).

**Current behavior.** For each output dimension the function considers the corresponding input dimensions after left-padding shapes with 1s to a common rank:

| Input dims for position *i* | Output dim |
|---|---|
| All concrete, compatible (one is 1 or both equal) | Concrete value (the non-1 value, or 1) |
| Exactly one symbolic `dim_param`, rest are concrete 1s | That symbolic expression is propagated |
| Two or more *distinct* symbolic `dim_param` strings | **Fully unknown** (no value, no param) |

The third row is the critical case. Broadcasting `"N"` against `"M"` produces a dimension with neither a `dim_value` nor a `dim_param`. The runtime semantics are correct (either `N == M`, or one of them is 1, or the model is invalid), but shape inference cannot express the result as a symbolic formula like `broadcast(N, M)`.

> **Why no symbolic broadcast expression?** Expressing the broadcast result would require a new expression node `broadcast(e1, e2)` whose evaluation depends on the *runtime values* of `e1` and `e2` (not just their structure). The current arithmetic helpers (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`) produce expressions whose *shape* is fully determined at compile time given the symbol bindings. A `broadcast` expression would have conditional semantics (`max(e1, e2)` when both are non-1, `e1` when `e2 = 1`, etc.) and cannot be reduced without a constraint solver. Introducing it would require either a richer expression language or a conservative approximation, both of which are out of scope for this RFC.

Reviewer: @copilot , it is not hard to support "broadcast" as a symbolic function in the string-expression, just like "ceil" or "floor"  in examples above.

1. **Derived dimensions become unknown.** A Conv or Pool operator applied to an input of height `H` produces an output of height `(H + pad_top + pad_bottom - kernel_h) / stride_h`. If `H` is symbolic, the current inference leaves the output height entirely unknown, breaking downstream inference.

2. **Concat on symbolic dims loses information.** Concatenating tensors of shapes `[M]` and `[N]` on axis 0 produces shape `[?]` today. The fact that the output length is `M+N` is discarded.

3. **Repeat/Tile cannot propagate.** Repeating a tensor of shape `[N]` three times should give `[3*N]`, but current inference yields `[?]`.

4. **Data propagation stops at dynamic shapes.** Operators like `Div`, `Neg`, `Relu`, `Ceil`, and `Floor` are frequently used in shape-computation subgraphs. Without propagation support for these ops, inferred shapes for downstream nodes stay unknown even when a symbolic expression could be produced.

5. **Loop scan-output iteration dimension is lost.** When a Loop op has a known trip count input `M`, the scan outputs have a leading dimension of `M`, but this is not inferred today.

### Use cases

> - **Exporter toolchains (PyTorch, Dynamo, JAX).** Exporters emit models with symbolic batch, sequence, or spatial dimensions. Downstream compilers (MLIR, TensorRT, OnnxRuntime) rely on shape inference to plan memory and validate graphs. Richer inferred shapes reduce the need for runtime shape computation.

Reviewer 2: I think runtime usually only care about equality. Using formulas helps reducing the number of distinct shape values.

- **Memory planning.** A runtime that knows an output shape is `(H+2)/2` rather than `?` can pre-allocate the buffer when `H` is resolved at execution time.

- **Graph optimization.** Pattern matchers that fold `Shape → arithmetic → Reshape` chains work better when symbolic expressions survive inference.

> - **Model visualization and debugging.** Seeing `(N*stride - pad)` in a shape tooltip is far more informative than seeing `?`.

Reviewer 3: Nicer visualization makes sense to me!

## Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

### Symbolic expressions as `dim_param` strings

> A dimension in an ONNX `TensorShapeProto` can carry either a concrete integer (`dim_value`) or a named symbol (`dim_param`). This proposal reuses `dim_param` to carry **expression strings** when a dimension cannot be reduced to a concrete value:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dimension information of `TensorShapeProto` is stored either in the `dim_value` or `dim_param` field.
The former is used if the dimension's length is a statically known integer value, while the latter is used to store a symbol name or expression.
```

```
dim_param = "N + 2"
dim_param = "(H + pad_top + pad_bottom - k_h) / stride_h"
dim_param = "M*3"
```

Tools that only understand simple identifiers treat these as opaque names (the string is still a valid `dim_param`), while tools that understand the new convention can parse and evaluate the expression.

### Default symbol prefix changed to `_d`

> New symbols generated during graph-level shape inference now use the prefix `_d` instead of `unk__`. Generated symbols look like `_d0`, `_d1`, etc. This is more compact and less likely to conflict with user-defined names.

Reviewer 3: Where was this ever standardized? Is this a hallucination?

- Expression `dim_param` strings are opaque to tools that do not understand them. They act as a named symbol (dimension identity is by string equality).
- Graph-level shape inference continues to unify dimensions with the same `dim_param` string.

### Corner cases

| Scenario | Result |
|---|---|
| `dim` with neither `dim_value` nor `dim_param` (fully unknown) | Arithmetic on it returns a fully unknown dim |
| Division by zero | Not handled by these helpers; callers must guard against it before calling `/` |
| `SAME` auto-pad | Output dim equals input dim (no expression needed); handled as before |
| Negative padding / stride | Expressions are still generated; values are only validated at runtime |

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- **Expression strings are opaque to old tools.** A tool that only understands simple identifier `dim_param` values will treat `"N + 2"` as an opaque symbol name. This is safe but may be confusing.
- **No algebraic simplification.** Expressions are not simplified, so chained operations can produce verbose strings like `"((_d0 + 2) - 1) / 2"`. This is a known limitation.

> - **Parser burden on consumers.** Tools that want to evaluate expressions must implement a small expression parser. No shared library is provided.

Reviewer 3: Which downstream library would actually want to do that?

- **Integer semantics only.** Division is integer (truncating) division. Fractional semantics are not supported.

## Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

### Why `dim_param` strings and not a new protobuf field?

> Adding a new field to `TensorShapeProto.Dimension` would require a protobuf schema change and a version bump. Encoding expressions in the existing `dim_param` string is 100% backward compatible: old tools see an opaque symbol name and continue to work.

Reviewer 3: This is not true! The standard [says](https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/main/docs/IR.md):
> The name of each dimension variable SHOULD adhere to [C90 identifier syntax rules](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/identifier).

It is perfectly legal today to name an input `"foo+1"`. I therefore assume this would break shape inference on currently correct models.

Reviewer 4: I think this is what "old tools see an opaque symbol name and continue to work." is saying. Today we don't assign any meaning to an input "foo+1" in the "old tools". With this proposal, any generated expressions like such will continue to be a single symbol in the "old tools". Existing tools that do assign meaning to "foo+1" other than a single symbol are not spec compliant.

Now, "new" tools that implement this spec may see old models with "foo+1" and start to interpret them differently than intended, but this is strictly the responsibility of the new tool, and can easily be solvable with IR versioning.

### What is the impact of not doing this?

Exporters fall back to generating fully unknown shapes for almost every operator applied to a dynamic input, causing downstream compilers to either fail or produce suboptimal code.

## Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- **TensorFlow/XLA**: XLA uses a symbolic expression system for shapes (`xla::Shape` with symbolic dimensions represented as `DynamicDimension`). Arithmetic on shapes produces new symbolic values, and a solver can determine dimension equality.
- **PyTorch's `torch.export` / `torch.fx`**: Symbolic shapes are tracked as `SymInt` objects. Arithmetic on `SymInt` values builds an expression tree that is simplified by a constraint solver.
- **MLIR's `ShapedType` with dynamic dimensions**: MLIR uses `-1` to represent dynamic dimensions in IR, but individual dialects (e.g., `tensor.dim`) can carry symbolic expressions in attributes.

> - **ONNX-MLIR**: The ONNX-MLIR compiler propagates symbolic shapes through its own pass pipeline, independent of the ONNX runtime shape inference.

Reviewer 4: With shape computation standardized, downstream will not have to continue to maintain a copy of the same logic for each of them.

> - **Existing workaround**: Before this change, users had to run ONNX shape inference with concrete example inputs (via `onnxruntime.InferenceSession`) or use external tools like `onnx-simplifier` to resolve shapes.

Reviewer 3: This misses the mark. If users are fine with using static shapes, then they can already achieve everything proposed here when building the graph. I.e., this is an issue with their graph-building libraries rather than the ONNX standard.

## Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> - **Expression string format standardisation**: Should the expression syntax be formally specified (grammar, precedence rules, allowed functions)? Currently it is only informally documented in code comments.

Reviewer 3: Informal is not sufficient if these strings are intended for downstream use.
